Connect to Data Sources
=======================

EvaDB supports a wide range of data sources including SQL database systems, object stores, and vector database systems.

Connect to an Existing SQL Database System
------------------------------------------

1. Use the :ref:`CREATE DATABASE<create-database>` statement to connect to an **existing** SQL database server. For example, here is the SQL command to connect EvaDB with a locally running :ref:`PostgreSQL<postgresql>` database server running on port ``5432``.

.. code-block::

   CREATE DATABASE restaurant_reviews 
   WITH ENGINE = 'postgres', 
   PARAMETERS = {
       "user": "eva",
       "password": "password",
       "host": "localhost",
       "port": "5432",
       "database": "restaurant_reviews"
   };

For quick prototyping, you can use an embedded :ref:`SQLite<sqlite>` database. Here, the SQLite database file is called ``evadb.db``.

.. code-block::

   CREATE DATABASE restaurant_reviews 
   WITH ENGINE = 'sqlite', 
   PARAMETERS = {
       "database": "evadb.db"
   };

.. note::

   Go over the :ref:`CREATE DATABASE<create-database>` statement for more details. The :ref:`Databases<databases>` page lists all the database systems that EvaDB currently supports.


2. Preview the data using ``SELECT``

You can now preview the data stored in the ``food_review`` table in the ``restaurant_reviews`` database with a :ref:`SELECT<select>` statement.

.. code-block:: sql

   SELECT * FROM restaurant_reviews.food_review;

3. Run native queries inside the connected database with ``USE``

You can also run native queries directly inside the connected database system with the :ref:`USE<use>` statement.

.. code-block::

   USE restaurant_reviews {
       INSERT INTO food_review (name, review) 
       VALUES (
           'Customer 1', 
           'I ordered fried rice but it is too salty.'
       )
   };

Connect to Object Store
------------------------

EvaDB supports diverse types of `unstructured data` (e.g., PDFs, videos). You can load a video from an S3 cloud bucket into EvaDB using the :ref:`LOAD<load-video>` statement.

.. code-block:: sql

   LOAD VIDEO 's3://bucket/eva_videos/mnist.mp4' INTO MNISTVid;

.. note::

   Go over the :ref:`LOAD VIDEO<load-video>` statement for more details on the types of unstructured data that EvaDB supports.

Connect to Local Filesystem
---------------------------

You can load a collection of images obtained from Reddit from the local filesystem into EvaDB using the :ref:`LOAD IMAGE<load-image>` statement.

.. code-block:: sql

   LOAD IMAGE 'reddit-images/*.jpg' INTO reddit_dataset;


Connect to Vector Database System
---------------------------------

Vector database systems are useful for querying unstructured data. A vector index contains the vectors (embeddings) generated by processing the unstructured data using a feature extractor function.

You can use the ``CREATE INDEX`` statement to connect to an existing vector database system.

.. code-block:: text

   CREATE INDEX index_name ON table_name (data) USING FAISS;

.. note::

   Go over the :ref:`CREATE INDEX<create-index>` statement for more details. The :ref:`Vector Databases<vector_databases>` page lists all the vector database systems that EvaDB currently supports.

.. include:: ../shared/designs/design3.rst